Describe Cluster Shutdown and Restart in docs (#53510)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/cluster-shutdown-and-restart.md

---

> reviewers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

No need to include this if not set.

Author: I remove it.

title: Shutting Down and Restarting Clusters
content_type: task
weight: 55
---

<!-- overview -->

This page outlines the steps required to safely shut down and restart Kubernetes clusters.

As cluster administrators, you may need to suspend your running cluster and restart it for later use. There are different reasons why you may need to perform this shutdown, such as cluster maintenance or saving on operation/resource costs.

At a high level, the steps you perform for shutting down are:

> - Back up the cluster

Author: Because workloads must be backed up by users, I did not update for your comment.
Here is overview. And the detail is Line 48-55.
I added notes in Line 52-55.

> - Back up the cluster

Reviewer: I don't think backing up workloads is a hard prerequisite for a cluster shutdown. It depends on many factors, including on what you do for workload data persistence.

> - Back up the cluster

Reviewer: I don't think people should be told that before they shut down their cluster they must always back it up.

They should think about whether they need to, but we should accept that their decision might be "actually no".

> - Back up the cluster

Reviewer: People will read this before they read the rest of the page. Perhaps it's better to move the overview of the steps to come after the prerequisites?

> - Back up the cluster

Author: I created this page with a structure similar to cluster-upgrade.md.
I may be putting too much in the overview compared to other pages.
The high-level procedure described in the overview is explained in detail later, and I feel it’s just adding noise, so I removed it.

- Cordon the nodes (mark as unschedulable)
- Drain pods from nodes
- Shut down nodes
- Shut down any dependencies of your cluster

Meanwhile, the steps you perform for restarting are:
- Start external dependencies
- Power on your nodes and waiting until they are Ready
- Mark the nodes as schedulable again

<!-- body -->

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

You must have an existing cluster. This page is about shutting down and restarting clusters from Kubernetes

> {{< skew currentVersionAddMinor -1 >}} to Kubernetes {{< skew currentVersion >}}. You must also have access to the cluster as a user with the cluster admin role.

Reviewer: This doesn't look right. What are we trying to say here?

## Backup your cluster

If the cluster has etcd, create an [etcd backup](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/#backing-up-an-etcd-cluster). This backup may be useful in restoring the cluster if restarting the cluster didn't work as intended.

## Shut Down Clusters

You can shut down your cluster in a graceful manner by gracefully shutting down its nodes. This will allow you to gracefully restart the cluster for later use. While [node shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/node-shutdown/#graceful-node-shutdown) allows you to safely evict the pods of the node to another available node, cluster shutdowns do not need evicted pods to be rescheduled anywhere else until the cluster is restarted. Thus, this procedure suppresses any pod rescheduling from the nodes being shutdown until cluster restart.

> ### (Optional) Checking for certificate expiration

Author: I think I'll fix it according to the comments.

> ### (Optional) Checking for certificate expiration

Author: I moved this section to the first step.

```bash
openssl x509 -in /etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver.crt -noout -enddate
```

Example output:

```bash
notAfter=Mar  3 09:18:19 2026 GMT
``` 

To ensure that the cluster can restart gracefully after this shut down, plan to restart it on or before the specified date. 
Note that various certificates may have different expiration dates.

### Making nodes unschedulable

Make all nodes in the cluster unschedulable using kubectl cordon

```bash
kubectl cordon node1 node2 node3
```

### Terminating pods in the nodes

Evict all the pods using `kubectl drain`

While `kubectl drain` should basically be enough due to it capable of internally making the specified nodes unschedulable before pod eviction, larger clusters may need to make sure all nodes are properly cordoned first before draining. You can check the nodes' schedulability using kubectl get nodes

```bash
kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets node1 node2 node3
```

### Shutting down nodes in the cluster

Shut down all of the nodes in the cluster. You can do this in ways that best fit your cluster; such as through your cloud provider's web console, or a script, or playbook. 

Example:

```bash

> systemctl poweroff

Author: I added to execute the command on all nodes.

---
title: Shutting Down and Restarting Clusters
content_type: task
weight: 55
---

<!-- overview -->

This page outlines the steps required to safely shut down and restart Kubernetes clusters.

> As cluster administrators, you may need to suspend your running cluster and restart it for later use. There are different reasons why you may need to perform this shutdown, such as cluster maintenance or saving on operation/resource costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As cluster administrators, you may need to suspend your running cluster and restart it at a later time. There are different reasons why you may need to perform this shutdown, such as cluster maintenance or saving on operation/resource costs.
```

At a high level, the steps you perform for shutting down are:
- Back up the cluster
- Cordon the nodes (mark as unschedulable)
- Drain pods from nodes
- Shut down nodes
- Shut down any dependencies of your cluster

Meanwhile, the steps you perform for restarting are:
- Start external dependencies
- Power on your nodes and wait until they are Ready
- Mark the nodes as schedulable again

<!-- body -->

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

You must have an existing cluster. This page is about shutting down and restarting clusters. You must also have access to the cluster as a user with the cluster admin role.

> ### (Optional) Checking for certificate expiration

Author: fixed as your suggestion.

If you are shutting the cluster down for an extended period, identify the date on which certificates will expire.

```bash
openssl x509 -in /etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver.crt -noout -enddate
```

Example output:

```bash
notAfter=Mar  3 09:18:19 2026 GMT
``` 

To ensure that the cluster can restart gracefully after this shut down, plan to restart it on or before the specified date. 
Note that various certificates may have different expiration dates.

## Backup your cluster

> If the cluster has etcd, create an [etcd backup](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/#backing-up-an-etcd-cluster). This backup may be useful in restoring the cluster if restarting the cluster does not work.

Reviewer: When would a cluster not have etcd? We should explain that to readers.

Author: I added the links to external etcd in below.

Author: Under consideration.

> If the cluster has etcd, create an [etcd backup](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/#backing-up-an-etcd-cluster). This backup may be useful in restoring the cluster if restarting the cluster didn't work as intended.

Author: fixed as your suggestion.

{{< note >}}
- This procedure terminates workloads normally to prevent data crush, but if necessary, back up the workloads. Check the backup method for each workload.

> - Cluster shutdown will be executed by the cluster administrator, but workload backups must be executed by each user. The cluster administrator should establish management rule for cluster shutdown, such as notifying users in advance.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer "process" instead of "rule"

{{< /note >}}

## Shut Down Clusters

> You can shut down your cluster in a graceful manner by gracefully shutting down its nodes. This will allow you to gracefully restart the cluster for later use. While [node shutdown](/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/node-shutdown/#graceful-node-shutdown) allows you to safely evict the pods of the node to another available node, cluster shutdowns do not need evicted pods to be rescheduled anywhere else until the cluster is restarted. Thus, this procedure suppresses any pod rescheduling from the nodes being shutdown until cluster restart.

Author: Added about automatic VM deletion in prerequisites.

### Making nodes unschedulable

Make all nodes in the cluster unschedulable using kubectl cordon

```bash

> kubectl cordon node1 node2 node3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl cordon --selector='!node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane'
```

Reviewer: How do readers work out which node names to type in?

Reviewer: But yes, I would complete the drain of the worker nodes before preventing Pod launches on control plane nodes (if there are any).

Author: I updated it so that the worker nodes are drained first, followed by the control plane nodes.

```

### Terminating pods in the nodes

Evict all the pods using `kubectl drain`

While `kubectl drain` should basically be enough due to it capable of internally making the specified nodes unschedulable before pod eviction, larger clusters may need to make sure all nodes are properly cordoned first before draining. You can check the nodes' schedulability using kubectl get nodes

```bash
kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets node1 node2 node3
```

### Shutting down nodes in the cluster

Shut down all of the nodes in the cluster. You can do this in ways that best fit your cluster; such as through your cloud provider's web console, or a script, or playbook. 

Example:

Run the following command on all nodes.

```bash
systemctl poweroff
```

### Shutting down cluster dependencies

After all nodes have successfully shut down, shut down any other cluster dependencies that are no longer needed, such as external storages. Consult your vendor's documentation to see if some resources are okay to shut down, suspend, or delete.

## Restarting Clusters

This section describes the process you need to restart the cluster after being gracefully shutdown.

> If the cluster fails to recover, you restore the cluster to its previous state using the [etcd backup](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/#restoring-an-etcd-cluster).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the cluster fails to recover, restore the cluster to its previous state using the [etcd backup](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/#restoring-an-etcd-cluster).
```

Author: fixed as your suggestion.

### Powering on cluster dependencies

Power on any cluster dependencies you need for your cluster, such as external storages.

### Powering on cluster machines

Start all cluster machines (i.e. your nodes). Use the method best-fit for your cluster to turn on the machines, like using the cloud provider's web console. 

> 

Reviewer: I'd bring up the control plane first, especially if the process involves manual toil.

Reviewer: Kubernetes will recover much more smoothly if the control plane comes up first. If powering on / bringing up nodes in arbitrary order then there will be no control plane services until etcd has quorum, so the mean time to recover could be quite different.

Also, cluster security features might be missing because the DaemonSet controller won't be / might not be running.

Author: I updated it so that the worker nodes are started after the control plane nodes are started.

> Allow a few minutes for the cluster's control plane nodes and worker nodes to become `Ready`. Verify that all nodes are `Ready`. 

Reviewer 2: May be add following here at the end of the line?
Control plane components (`kube-apiserver`, `etcd`) may take longer.

Author: I added "Control plane components (kube-apiserver, etcd) may take longer."

```bash
kubectl get nodes
```

### Making your nodes schedulable again

Once the nodes are `Ready`, mark all the nodes in the cluster schedulable using kubectl uncordon

```bash
kubectl uncordon node1 node2 node3
```

Wait until all pods are back in operation. Verify that the pods are `Running`

```bash
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces
```

### Caveats

> Pre-shutdown pod scheduling might not be preserved after restart. Making the nodes schedulable again happens sequentially. Kube-scheduler will only schedule the pods to `Ready` and `Schedulable` nodes polled at an instance. In case there are many nodes that need to be made schedulable again, the pod scheduling might end up imbalanced in favor of the first nodes that become schedulable at that instance.

Reviewer 3: To avoid the imbalance, can user recovery control-plane nodes(scheduler) after worker nodes? Should we mention this? (No sure if it is doable as the schedulers are available before the uncordon step above.)

Author: I am considering  about this one.

Author: > To avoid the imbalance, can user recovery control-plane nodes(scheduler) after worker nodes? Should we mention this? (No sure if it is doable as the schedulers are available before the uncordon step above.)

On this page, I would like to describe how to stop all nodes (all control plane node and worker node), not recovery any nodes. Could you please tell me what steps your comment refers to?
Currently, my steps are following for restart.
1. Power on any dependencies
2. Power on all machines (Control Plane node and Worker node)
3. kubectl uncordon node1 node2 node3 (All worker node)

<!-- body -->

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

- You must have an existing cluster. This page is about shutting down and restarting clusters. You must also have access to the cluster as a user with the cluster admin role.
- This procedure does not apply to environments using a node autoscaler.
- In this procedure, you will shut down the nodes in order to shut down the cluster. Some server management systems are configured to delete servers (VMs) that no longer respond to liveness checks. In such cases, the VMs may be deleted automatically, so you should not perform this procedure.

### (Optional) Check for certificate expiration {#check-certificate-expiration}

If you are shutting the cluster down for an extended period, identify the date on which certificates will expire.

```bash
openssl x509 -in /etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver.crt -noout -enddate
```

Example output:

```bash
notAfter=Mar  3 09:18:19 2026 GMT
``` 

To ensure that the cluster can restart gracefully after this shut down, plan to restart it on or before the specified date. 
Note that various certificates may have different expiration dates.

> ## (Optional) Backup an etcd cluster

Reviewer: "Optional" might overstate it.

- you should back up etcd
- if you use something that isn't etcd but is compatible, you should back that up instead.

And then we can tell people that, even though we recommend it, they can skip the backup if they don't value their data.

- Mark the nodes as schedulable again

<!-- body -->

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

- You must have an existing cluster. This page is about shutting down and restarting clusters. You must also have access to the cluster as a user with the cluster admin role.
- You can't use the node autoscaler to perform this procedure. Disable the node autoscaler.
- In this procedure, you will shut down the nodes in order to shut down the cluster. Some server management systems are configured to delete servers (VMs) that no longer respond to liveness checks. In such cases, the VMs may be deleted automatically, so you should not perform this procedure.

### (Optional) Check for certificate expiration {#check-certificate-expiration}

If you are shutting the cluster down for an extended period, identify the date on which certificates will expire.

```bash
openssl x509 -in /etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver.crt -noout -enddate
```

Example output:

```bash
notAfter=Mar  3 09:18:19 2026 GMT
``` 

To ensure that the cluster can restart gracefully after this shut down, plan to restart it on or before the specified date. 
Note that various certificates may have different expiration dates.

> ## Backup your cluster

Reviewer: This sounds like what you're really doing is taking a backup of the control plane data; if so, let's makes that really clear.

Author: I updated it to "etcd backup" and made it optional.

{{< note >}}
- This procedure terminates workloads normally to prevent data corruption, but if necessary, back up the workloads. Check the backup method for each workload.
- Cluster shutdown will be executed by the cluster administrator, but workload backups may needed be executed by the people responsible for each individual workload.
  As a cluster administrator, you should establish management processes for cluster shutdown, such as notifying users in advance.
{{< /note >}}

## Shut down the nodes in your cluster {#node-shutdown}

You can shut down your cluster in a graceful manner by gracefully shutting down its nodes. This will typically allow you to gracefully restart the cluster for later use. While [node shutdown](/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/node-shutdown/#graceful-node-shutdown) allows you to safely evict the pods of the node to another available node, cluster shutdowns do not need evicted pods to be rescheduled anywhere else until the cluster is restarted. Thus, this procedure suppresses any pod rescheduling from the nodes being shutdown until cluster restart.

> 

Reviewer: At this point, explain that the plan is to shut down worker nodes first.

Author: I described the sequence of shutting down the worker nodes first and then the control plane nodes.

## Restart the cluster

This section describes the process you need to restart the cluster after being gracefully shutdown.

If the cluster fails to recover, restore the cluster to its previous state using the [etcd backup](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/#restoring-an-etcd-cluster).

### Powering on cluster dependencies

Power on any cluster dependencies you need for your cluster, such as external storages.

### Powering on cluster machines

Start all cluster machines (i.e. your nodes). Use the method best-fit for your cluster to turn on the machines, like using the cloud provider's web console. 

Allow a few minutes for the cluster's control plane nodes and worker nodes to become `Ready`. Control plane components (kube-apiserver, etcd) may take longer. Verify that all nodes are `Ready`. 

```bash
kubectl get nodes
```

### Making control plane nodes schedulable

Once the control plane nodes are `Ready`, mark all control plane nodes in the cluster schedulable using `kubectl uncordon`

```bash

> kubectl uncordon control-plane-node1 control-plane-node2 control-plane-node3

Reviewer: Could use a selector here (I would)

Author: I updated to use a selector.

```

### Making worker nodes schedulable

Once the worker nodes are `Ready`, mark all worker nodes in the cluster schedulable using `kubectl uncordon`

```bash

> kubectl uncordon worker-node1 worker-node2 worker-node3

Reviewer: I would use a selector here. It could be worth advising administrators to uncordon nodes in batches.

Author: I updated to use a selector.

---
title: Shutting Down and Restarting Clusters
content_type: task
weight: 55
---

<!-- overview -->

This page outlines the steps required to safely shut down and restart Kubernetes clusters.

As cluster administrators, you may need to suspend your running cluster and restart it at a later time. There are different reasons why you may need to perform this shutdown, such as cluster maintenance or saving on operation/resource costs.

At a high level, the steps you perform for shutting down are:
- Back up the cluster
- Cordon the nodes (mark as unschedulable)
- Drain pods from nodes
- Shut down nodes
- Shut down any dependencies of your cluster

Meanwhile, the steps you perform for restarting are:
- Start external dependencies
- Power on your nodes and wait until they are Ready
- Mark the nodes as schedulable again

<!-- body -->

## {{% heading "prerequisites" %}}

- You must have an existing cluster. This page is about shutting down and restarting clusters. You must also have access to the cluster as a user with the cluster admin role.

> - You can't use the node autoscaler to perform this procedure. Disable the node autoscaler.

Reviewer: I think you can shut down a cluster that uses node autoscaling.

Are you saying that if people use node autoscaling, that their cluster is outside the scope of this task page? If so, make that clear; also, we should try do document how to shut down clusters that use node autoscaling.

> - You can't use the node autoscaler to perform this procedure. Disable the node autoscaler.

Author: I excluded node autoscaling from the scope.
Although a procedure for stopping a cluster is also needed for environments that use a node autoscaler, there is currently no cluster shutdown procedure documented anywhere. So I think it’s important to first clearly document the shutdown procedure for a basic environment.
